Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
haemostasis and coagulation. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Give an overview of haemostasis.
Haemostasis is the physiological process that arrests bleeding from an injured
vessel while keeping the blood fluid within intact vessels,
a finely balanced system. It proceeds in overlapping stages.
First, the vascular response: the injured vessel constricts, reducing blood flow.
Second, primary haemostasis: platelets adhere to the damaged vessel wall,
become activated, and aggregate to form a soft platelet plug that provides the
immediate, temporary seal.
Third, secondary haemostasis: the coagulation cascade,
a series of enzymatic reactions among the clotting factors, generates thrombin,
which converts soluble fibrinogen into insoluble fibrin strands that mesh through
and stabilise the platelet plug into a firm clot.
Finally, the process is regulated and ultimately reversed:
natural anticoagulants limit the clot to the site of injury,
and fibrinolysis later dissolves it as the vessel heals.
So haemostasis arrests bleeding through vasoconstriction,
the formation of a platelet plug in primary haemostasis,
its consolidation by fibrin from the coagulation cascade in secondary haemostasis,
and the regulation and eventual fibrinolytic removal of the clot — a balanced
sequence preventing both haemorrhage and unwanted thrombosis.
Describe primary haemostasis — the platelet response.
Primary haemostasis is the rapid formation of the platelet plug,
occurring in three steps.
The first is adhesion: when the vessel is injured,
the underlying collagen and other subendothelial structures are exposed,
and platelets adhere to them, a process requiring von Willebrand factor,
which bridges the platelet to the collagen,
especially under the high shear of arterial flow.
The second is activation: the adhering platelets are activated, changing shape,
and releasing the contents of their granules — including adenosine diphosphate,
thromboxane and serotonin — which recruit and activate more platelets,
and expressing receptors on their surface.
The third is aggregation: the activated platelets bind one another through
fibrinogen bridges linking their surface receptors,
the glycoprotein two-b three-a receptors, building up the platelet plug.
This plug seals small injuries immediately.
So primary haemostasis forms the platelet plug by adhesion of platelets to exposed
collagen via von Willebrand factor,
their activation with release of granule contents recruiting more platelets,
and their aggregation through fibrinogen bridges — a rapid response,
the target of antiplatelet drugs, and dependent on adequate platelet numbers and
function and on von Willebrand factor.
Describe the coagulation cascade.
The coagulation cascade is the series of reactions, in secondary haemostasis,
by which the clotting factors — mostly enzymes circulating as inactive precursors —
are sequentially activated, each activating the next,
amplifying the signal to generate a burst of thrombin and ultimately fibrin.
It is traditionally described in two converging pathways.
The extrinsic, or tissue-factor, pathway is triggered when tissue factor,
exposed by injury, activates factor seven;
it is the principal initiator in vivo and is assessed by the prothrombin time.
The intrinsic, or contact, pathway is triggered by contact activation within the
blood and involves factors twelve, eleven, nine and eight;
it is assessed by the activated partial thromboplastin time.
The two pathways converge on a common pathway at the activation of factor ten,
which, with factor five, forms the complex that converts prothrombin to thrombin.
Modern understanding describes this as a cell-based process on platelet surfaces
rather than two separate pathways.
So the coagulation cascade is the sequential activation of clotting factors — the
extrinsic tissue-factor pathway initiating in vivo and the intrinsic pathway
amplifying, converging at factor ten on the common pathway to generate thrombin —
the two limbs assessed by the prothrombin and activated partial thromboplastin
times, and now understood as a cell-based process.
Describe the central role of thrombin and the formation of fibrin.
Thrombin is the central enzyme of coagulation,
the point on which the cascade converges and from which the clot is built,
and it has multiple actions that make it pivotal.
Its principal action is to convert the soluble plasma protein fibrinogen into
fibrin: it cleaves fibrinogen to fibrin monomers, which polymerise into strands,
and thrombin also activates factor thirteen,
which cross-links these strands into a stable,
insoluble fibrin mesh that consolidates the platelet plug into a firm clot.
Beyond this, thrombin powerfully amplifies its own generation by activating
upstream factors — factors five, eight and eleven — and the platelets,
a positive feedback producing the explosive thrombin burst.
It also, importantly, participates in the regulation of clotting,
activating protein C to limit the process.
So thrombin is the central enzyme: it converts fibrinogen to fibrin and activates
the cross-linking factor to form a stable clot,
it amplifies its own production by activating upstream factors and platelets,
and it contributes to regulation — the convergence point of coagulation and the key
to forming the definitive fibrin clot.
Describe the natural anticoagulant mechanisms.
Because unchecked coagulation would be disastrous,
the process is tightly regulated by natural anticoagulant mechanisms that confine
the clot to the site of injury and keep the blood fluid elsewhere.
The intact endothelium itself is antithrombotic, presenting a smooth,
non-activating surface and producing inhibitors such as prostacyclin and nitric
oxide.
Antithrombin, a circulating inhibitor,
neutralises thrombin and other activated factors,
and its action is greatly accelerated by heparin — the basis of heparin's
anticoagulant effect.
The protein C system: thrombin, bound to endothelial thrombomodulin,
activates protein C, which, with its cofactor protein S,
inactivates the activated factors five and eight, switching off the amplification.
Tissue factor pathway inhibitor limits the initiating tissue-factor complex.
So coagulation is regulated by the antithrombotic endothelium,
by antithrombin neutralising thrombin and activated factors — accelerated by
heparin — by the protein C and S system inactivating factors five and eight,
and by tissue factor pathway inhibitor;
these mechanisms confine the clot and prevent pathological thrombosis,
and their deficiency causes thrombophilia.
Describe fibrinolysis.
Fibrinolysis is the process that breaks down the fibrin clot once it has served its
purpose, restoring vessel patency as healing proceeds, and balancing clot formation.
Its central enzyme is plasmin, which digests fibrin into soluble fibrin degradation
products, including the D-dimer.
Plasmin is generated from its inactive precursor plasminogen,
which is incorporated into the clot,
by plasminogen activators — chiefly tissue plasminogen activator,
released from the endothelium, whose action is localised to the clot because it is
most active when bound to fibrin.
The system is itself regulated by inhibitors,
including plasminogen activator inhibitor and antiplasmin,
preventing excessive fibrinolysis.
This system is exploited clinically:
thrombolytic drugs activate it to dissolve pathological clots,
while antifibrinolytic drugs such as tranexamic acid inhibit it to reduce bleeding.
So fibrinolysis dissolves the clot through plasmin,
generated from plasminogen by tissue plasminogen activator acting locally on
fibrin, producing degradation products including the D-dimer,
and regulated by inhibitors — a system balanced against coagulation and manipulated
by thrombolytic and antifibrinolytic drugs such as tranexamic acid.
How is haemostasis assessed by laboratory tests?
Haemostasis is assessed by tests directed at its different components,
which together localise a defect. The platelet count measures the number of
platelets, though not their function,
which requires specific platelet function tests.
The two classical clotting times assess the coagulation cascade:
the prothrombin time, often expressed as the international normalised ratio,
assesses the extrinsic and common pathways,
and is prolonged by warfarin and by liver disease and is used to monitor them;
the activated partial thromboplastin time assesses the intrinsic and common
pathways, and is prolonged by, and used to monitor, heparin.
The fibrinogen level and the thrombin time assess fibrin formation.
The D-dimer reflects fibrinolysis and is raised when clot is being broken down.
Increasingly, viscoelastic tests assess the whole process dynamically at the point
of care.
So haemostasis is assessed by the platelet count for number,
the prothrombin time and international normalised ratio for the extrinsic pathway
and warfarin, the activated partial thromboplastin time for the intrinsic pathway
and heparin, fibrinogen and thrombin time for fibrin, the D-dimer for fibrinolysis,
and viscoelastic tests for the whole — each illuminating a part of the system.
What is the relevance of haemostasis to anaesthesia?
Haemostasis is of major relevance to anaesthesia and the perioperative period,
where both bleeding and thrombosis are constant concerns.
Understanding the system underlies the management of the many patients taking drugs
that modify it — the antiplatelet agents acting on primary haemostasis,
and the anticoagulants, the heparins acting through antithrombin,
warfarin on the vitamin-K-dependent factors,
and the direct oral anticoagulants — whose timing around surgery and around
regional anaesthesia must be managed to balance thrombotic against bleeding and
spinal-haematoma risk.
It underlies the assessment and correction of coagulopathy and major haemorrhage,
with targeted use of blood products, fibrinogen and tranexamic acid,
increasingly guided by viscoelastic testing.
It underlies thromboprophylaxis against perioperative venous thromboembolism.
So haemostasis is central to anaesthesia through the perioperative management of
antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs, especially around regional anaesthesia;
the assessment and correction of coagulopathy and major bleeding;
and thromboprophylaxis — the balance between haemorrhage and thrombosis being a
constant and critical anaesthetic responsibility.
Pull it together: how is the balance between bleeding and clotting maintained?
I would draw it together around the concept of haemostatic balance — a dynamic
equilibrium between the forces that form clot and those that limit and remove it,
keeping blood fluid within vessels yet able to seal an injury at once.
On injury, the prohaemostatic mechanisms act in concert: vasoconstriction,
the rapid platelet plug of primary haemostasis,
and the thrombin-driven fibrin clot of the cascade,
amplified explosively to secure the breach.
Opposing and containing these are the regulatory mechanisms:
the antithrombotic endothelium, the natural anticoagulants — antithrombin,
protein C and S, and tissue factor pathway inhibitor — that confine the clot,
and fibrinolysis that later removes it.
Health is the balance; tipping towards the prohaemostatic side causes thrombosis,
and towards the other, bleeding, while drugs deliberately shift the balance.
So the balance between bleeding and clotting is maintained by the opposition of the
prohaemostatic forces — vasoconstriction,
platelets and the coagulation cascade — against the regulatory forces — the
antithrombotic endothelium, the natural anticoagulants and fibrinolysis — a dynamic
equilibrium whose disturbance causes thrombosis or haemorrhage and which
anaesthetic practice constantly manages.
Describe the role of vitamin K and the vitamin-K-dependent factors.
Vitamin K is essential to coagulation because it is required for the final
modification of several clotting factors that renders them functional,
a point of great pharmacological importance.
The vitamin-K-dependent factors are factors two, seven,
nine and ten — that is prothrombin and three others — together with the regulatory
proteins C and S.
These factors are synthesised by the liver in an inactive precursor form,
and vitamin K is the cofactor for an enzyme that carboxylates specific glutamate
residues on them; this carboxylation is what enables them to bind calcium and so to
anchor to phospholipid surfaces and participate in the cascade.
Without vitamin K, the factors are made but are non-functional.
This underlies the action of warfarin, which blocks the recycling of vitamin K,
depleting the functional factors and so anticoagulating;
it underlies the bleeding of vitamin K deficiency and liver disease;
and it is why vitamin K is given to reverse warfarin.
So vitamin K is the cofactor for carboxylating factors two, seven,
nine and ten and proteins C and S, enabling them to bind calcium and function;
its antagonism by warfarin, or its deficiency,
produces non-functional factors and bleeding,
reversed by giving vitamin K — a pivotal link between the vitamin and
anticoagulation.
Describe the cell-based model of coagulation.
The cell-based model is the modern understanding of coagulation, which,
rather than two separate cascades, describes the process as occurring in
overlapping phases on the surfaces of cells, better reflecting what happens in vivo.
The first phase is initiation: tissue factor,
exposed on cells at the site of injury, binds and activates factor seven,
generating a small amount of thrombin — the spark.
The second phase is amplification: this small amount of thrombin acts on the
platelets and on the cofactors, activating platelets and factors five,
eight and eleven on the platelet surface, priming the system.
The third phase is propagation: on the surface of the activated platelets,
the assembled enzyme complexes generate a large burst of thrombin — the thrombin
burst — sufficient to convert fibrinogen to fibrin and form the clot.
This cell-based view explains the central role of the platelet surface and of
thrombin's feedback.
So the cell-based model describes coagulation in three phases on cell surfaces:
initiation by tissue factor generating a little thrombin,
amplification in which that thrombin primes platelets and cofactors,
and propagation in which the platelet surface generates the thrombin burst that
forms fibrin — a more realistic account than the two-pathway cascade,
centred on the platelet and thrombin feedback.
Describe the mechanisms of the common anticoagulant drugs.
The anticoagulants act at different points of coagulation,
and their mechanisms follow from the physiology.
The heparins act through antithrombin:
unfractionated heparin binds antithrombin and greatly accelerates its inhibition of
thrombin and factor ten, affecting both;
the low-molecular-weight heparins act more selectively on factor ten.
Warfarin, an oral agent, blocks the recycling of vitamin K,
depleting the functional vitamin-K-dependent factors two, seven,
nine and ten over days, and is monitored by the prothrombin time as the
international normalised ratio.
The direct oral anticoagulants act directly on a single factor:
the direct thrombin inhibitor dabigatran on thrombin,
and the others — such as rivaroxaban and apixaban — directly on factor ten.
Each has implications for the timing of surgery and regional anaesthesia and for
reversal, with specific agents for some.
So the anticoagulants act variously:
the heparins by accelerating antithrombin against thrombin and factor ten,
warfarin by depleting the vitamin-K-dependent factors,
and the direct oral anticoagulants by directly inhibiting thrombin or factor ten —
mechanisms determining their monitoring,
their perioperative management and their reversal.
Describe the mechanisms of the antiplatelet drugs.
The antiplatelet drugs act on primary haemostasis,
interfering with the platelet activation and aggregation, at several points.
Aspirin irreversibly inhibits the enzyme cyclo-oxygenase in the platelet,
preventing the formation of thromboxane,
a promoter of platelet activation and aggregation;
because the platelet cannot synthesise new enzyme,
the effect lasts the platelet's lifetime, some days.
The thienopyridines and related drugs, such as clopidogrel,
ticagrelor and prasugrel, block the platelet's receptor for adenosine diphosphate,
one of the key agonists recruiting and activating platelets,
again impairing aggregation.
The glycoprotein two-b three-a receptor antagonists block the final common pathway
of aggregation, the receptor through which fibrinogen bridges platelets,
and are potent intravenous agents.
Their effects on bleeding and their timing around surgery and regional anaesthesia
must be managed.
So the antiplatelet drugs impair primary haemostasis:
aspirin by irreversibly blocking thromboxane synthesis,
the adenosine-diphosphate-receptor blockers such as clopidogrel by blocking
platelet activation, and the glycoprotein two-b three-a antagonists by blocking the
final aggregation step — mechanisms determining their potency,
duration and perioperative management.
Describe the inherited bleeding disorders relevant to anaesthesia.
The inherited bleeding disorders impair haemostasis and require recognition and
management before surgery.
Haemophilia A is a deficiency of factor eight, and haemophilia B,
or Christmas disease, a deficiency of factor nine; both are X-linked,
affecting males, and impair the cascade,
causing bleeding into joints and muscles and after surgery,
with a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time but a normal prothrombin
time and platelet count; they are managed by replacing the deficient factor.
Von Willebrand disease, the commonest inherited bleeding disorder,
is a deficiency or defect of von Willebrand factor,
which impairs platelet adhesion — primary haemostasis — and also lowers factor
eight, which it carries; it causes mucocutaneous bleeding and is managed with
desmopressin, which releases stored von Willebrand factor, or with concentrates.
So the inherited bleeding disorders include haemophilia A and B — X-linked
deficiencies of factors eight and nine impairing the cascade,
treated by factor replacement — and von Willebrand disease — a defect of von
Willebrand factor impairing platelet adhesion,
treated with desmopressin or concentrates — each requiring specific preoperative
assessment and correction.
Describe disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation is a serious acquired disorder in which the
haemostatic balance is grossly disturbed, with widespread,
inappropriate activation of coagulation throughout the circulation,
and it is always secondary to another condition — such as sepsis, major trauma,
obstetric catastrophes, or malignancy.
The pathological, widespread activation of coagulation generates fibrin throughout
the microcirculation, causing microvascular thrombosis that can contribute to organ
failure, and consuming the platelets and clotting factors.
This consumption, together with the secondary activation of fibrinolysis,
then leaves the patient unable to form effective clot where needed, so that,
paradoxically, the picture becomes one of bleeding — the consumptive coagulopathy.
The laboratory shows a falling platelet count and fibrinogen,
prolonged clotting times, and raised fibrin degradation products including the
D-dimer. Treatment is of the underlying cause,
with supportive replacement of platelets and factors.
So disseminated intravascular coagulation is the widespread inappropriate
activation of coagulation secondary to conditions such as sepsis and trauma,
causing microvascular thrombosis and then,
through consumption of platelets and factors,
bleeding — a consumptive coagulopathy diagnosed by the falling platelets and
fibrinogen and raised D-dimer, and treated by addressing the cause and replacing
components.
Describe thromboprophylaxis and Virchow's triad.
Venous thromboembolism — deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism — is a major
perioperative risk, and its prevention rests on understanding the factors that
promote thrombosis, classically summarised as Virchow's triad.
The triad comprises three categories of factor that predispose to thrombosis:
venous stasis — slowed blood flow, as from immobility, surgery and anaesthesia;
endothelial injury — damage to the vessel wall, as from surgery or trauma;
and hypercoagulability — an increased tendency of the blood to clot,
as from the surgical stress response, malignancy, the inherited thrombophilias,
or oestrogens.
Surgery and anaesthesia provoke all three, hence the perioperative risk.
Thromboprophylaxis accordingly addresses these:
mechanical methods — early mobilisation,
compression stockings and intermittent pneumatic compression — counter stasis;
and pharmacological methods — low-molecular-weight heparin or other anticoagulants
— counter hypercoagulability, balanced against bleeding risk.
So Virchow's triad — venous stasis,
endothelial injury and hypercoagulability — describes the predisposition to
thrombosis, all three provoked by surgery,
and thromboprophylaxis counters them with mechanical measures against stasis and
anticoagulants against hypercoagulability,
balanced against bleeding — a key perioperative responsibility.
Summarise the perioperative management of anticoagulation and regional anaesthesia.
I would summarise it as the careful balancing of the competing risks of thrombosis
and bleeding, with a particular concern for the catastrophe of spinal or epidural
haematoma.
The patient on anticoagulant or antiplatelet drugs presents a dilemma:
stopping the drug risks the thrombosis it was preventing,
while continuing it risks surgical bleeding and, if regional anaesthesia is used,
bleeding into the closed space of the neuraxis, which can cause permanent paralysis.
Management therefore individualises the decision:
assessing the thrombotic risk of stopping against the bleeding risk of continuing,
sometimes bridging with a shorter-acting agent,
and above all observing the recommended time intervals between the last dose of
each drug and the performance and removal of a neuraxial block — intervals based on
each drug's pharmacology — with similar care for the timing of restarting.
Guidelines codify these intervals.
So perioperative anticoagulation management balances thrombotic against bleeding
risk, individualising whether and when to stop and restart drugs and whether to
bridge, and — critically for regional anaesthesia — observing the drug-specific
time intervals around neuraxial block to avoid spinal haematoma; a careful,
guideline-informed balance central to safe practice.
Describe the structure of the platelet and its granules.
The platelet, though small and anucleate,
is a complex and highly active cell fragment whose structure is adapted to its
haemostatic function.
Its membrane carries the receptors essential to its actions — the glycoprotein
receptors for adhesion to von Willebrand factor and collagen,
and the glycoprotein two-b three-a receptor for the fibrinogen bridges of
aggregation — and an invaginated open canalicular system that increases its surface
area and allows secretion.
Its cytoskeleton enables the dramatic shape change of activation,
from disc to spiculated form.
Most distinctively, it contains storage granules whose release is central to
haemostasis: the dense granules store small molecules — adenosine diphosphate,
calcium and serotonin — that recruit and activate further platelets and promote
vasoconstriction; the alpha granules, more numerous,
store proteins — including fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor,
clotting factors and growth factors.
On activation, the platelet releases these granule contents,
amplifying the response.
So the platelet is structured for haemostasis with surface glycoprotein receptors
for adhesion and aggregation, a canalicular system and cytoskeleton for secretion
and shape change, and dense granules releasing adenosine diphosphate,
calcium and serotonin and alpha granules releasing fibrinogen and von Willebrand
factor — its activation and granule release amplifying clot formation,
and being the target of antiplatelet drugs.
Describe the antithrombotic and prothrombotic properties of the endothelium.
The vascular endothelium is not a passive lining but an active regulator of
haemostasis, normally maintaining the blood in a fluid state but able,
when injured, to promote clotting — a dual role central to confining clot to where
it is needed.
In its normal, antithrombotic state, the intact endothelium presents a smooth,
non-activating surface; it produces prostacyclin and nitric oxide,
which inhibit platelet activation and cause vasodilatation;
it expresses thrombomodulin, which switches thrombin to activating the
anticoagulant protein C; it carries heparin-like molecules that promote
antithrombin; and it secretes tissue plasminogen activator, promoting fibrinolysis.
When the endothelium is injured or activated, however,
its properties reverse to become prothrombotic:
the underlying collagen and tissue factor are exposed,
triggering platelet adhesion and the coagulation cascade,
and it releases von Willebrand factor and reduces its fibrinolytic activity.
So the endothelium actively regulates haemostasis: intact,
it is antithrombotic — producing prostacyclin, nitric oxide,
thrombomodulin and tissue plasminogen activator to inhibit platelets and clotting
and promote fibrinolysis — but when injured it becomes prothrombotic,
exposing collagen and tissue factor and releasing von Willebrand factor;
its central role being to keep blood fluid yet allow clotting at injury.
Describe the inherited thrombophilias.
The thrombophilias are conditions, often inherited,
that tip the haemostatic balance towards clotting,
increasing the risk of venous thromboembolism,
and they represent disturbances of the natural anticoagulant mechanisms or excess
of procoagulant factors.
The commonest inherited thrombophilia is factor five Leiden,
a mutation that renders factor five resistant to inactivation by activated protein
C, so that the normal switching-off of the cascade is impaired and thrombosis is
favoured.
The prothrombin gene mutation raises prothrombin levels.
Deficiencies of the natural anticoagulants — antithrombin,
protein C and protein S — each remove a brake on coagulation and predispose to
thrombosis, the antithrombin deficiency being the most thrombogenic.
These conditions increase the risk of venous thrombosis,
particularly when combined with the acquired risk factors of surgery, immobility,
pregnancy and oestrogens.
So the inherited thrombophilias — factor five Leiden with its resistance to
activated protein C, the prothrombin mutation, and deficiencies of antithrombin,
protein C and protein S — increase thrombotic risk by impairing the natural
anticoagulant mechanisms or raising procoagulant factors,
especially when combined with perioperative and other acquired risks,
relevant to thromboprophylaxis.
Describe the reversal agents for the anticoagulants.
The ability to reverse anticoagulation is important for managing bleeding and
urgent surgery, and the agents available follow from the drugs' mechanisms.
The action of unfractionated heparin is reversed by protamine,
a positively charged protein that binds and neutralises the negatively charged
heparin; it partly reverses the low-molecular-weight heparins.
Warfarin, which depletes the vitamin-K-dependent factors,
is reversed by replacing those factors — most rapidly and completely with a
prothrombin complex concentrate, which contains them,
together with vitamin K to restore synthesis, the vitamin acting more slowly;
fresh frozen plasma is a less ideal alternative.
For the direct oral anticoagulants, specific reversal agents have been developed:
idarucizumab, an antibody fragment that binds and neutralises the direct thrombin
inhibitor dabigatran; and andexanet alfa,
a decoy factor ten molecule that reverses the factor ten inhibitors.
So the anticoagulants are reversed according to their mechanism:
protamine neutralises heparin; warfarin is reversed by prothrombin complex
concentrate and vitamin K replacing the depleted factors;
and the direct oral anticoagulants by specific agents — idarucizumab for dabigatran
and andexanet for the factor ten inhibitors — a knowledge essential to managing
bleeding and urgent surgery.
Describe the coagulopathy of major trauma and massive transfusion.
Major haemorrhage, as in severe trauma,
produces a complex coagulopathy that worsens the bleeding,
and understanding it has transformed its management. Several mechanisms combine.
There is consumption and loss of platelets and clotting factors with the bleeding,
and their dilution by resuscitation fluids and stored red cells, which lack them.
Trauma itself triggers an acute endogenous coagulopathy,
with activation of anticoagulant and fibrinolytic pathways.
And the situation is aggravated by the lethal triad: hypothermia,
which impairs the enzymatic clotting reactions and platelet function; acidosis,
from hypoperfusion, which likewise impairs coagulation;
and the coagulopathy itself — a vicious cycle.
Management has accordingly shifted to damage-control resuscitation:
early use of blood components in balanced ratios rather than crystalloid,
the early use of tranexamic acid, the avoidance of hypothermia and acidosis,
and increasingly the guidance of component therapy by viscoelastic testing.
So the coagulopathy of major trauma arises from consumption,
loss and dilution of platelets and factors, an endogenous traumatic coagulopathy,
and the lethal triad of hypothermia, acidosis and coagulopathy;
its management is damage-control resuscitation — balanced blood components,
tranexamic acid, and the avoidance of hypothermia and acidosis,
guided by viscoelastic testing.
Describe viscoelastic testing of coagulation.
Viscoelastic testing is a method of assessing coagulation that,
unlike the conventional laboratory clotting times,
examines the whole dynamic process of clot formation,
strength and breakdown in whole blood, at the point of care and in near-real time,
making it valuable in major haemorrhage.
The techniques — thromboelastography and rotational thromboelastometry — measure
the changing viscoelastic properties of a blood sample as it clots,
producing a characteristic trace that broadens as the clot forms and strengthens
and then narrows if it breaks down.
From this trace, parameters describe the different phases:
the time to the start of clot formation, reflecting the clotting factors;
the rate of clot development and the maximum strength,
reflecting fibrinogen and platelets; and any subsequent lysis,
reflecting fibrinolysis.
This allows the specific defect to be identified and treated in a targeted way —
for example, giving fibrinogen, platelets,
or an antifibrinolytic as indicated — rather than empirically,
reducing unnecessary transfusion.
So viscoelastic testing — thromboelastography and rotational thromboelastometry —
assesses the whole dynamic process of clotting in whole blood at the point of care,
its trace revealing the time to clot, the rate and strength of clot formation,
and any lysis, allowing targeted correction of the specific defect in major
haemorrhage — an increasingly central tool in managing bleeding.
Describe the changes in coagulation in pregnancy and in the neonate.
Coagulation differs at the beginning of life and in pregnancy,
with practical consequences.
Pregnancy induces a physiological hypercoagulable state,
an adaptation to limit haemorrhage at delivery:
the levels of several clotting factors, particularly fibrinogen and factor eight,
rise; the natural anticoagulant protein S falls and there is acquired resistance to
activated protein C; and fibrinolysis is reduced.
The consequence is a markedly increased risk of venous thromboembolism throughout
pregnancy and especially the puerperium,
making thromboembolism a leading cause of maternal death and thromboprophylaxis
important.
The neonate, by contrast, has an immature but balanced coagulation system:
the levels of many clotting factors, particularly the vitamin-K-dependent ones,
are physiologically low at birth, as are some natural anticoagulants,
so the system is balanced but with little reserve;
the low vitamin-K-dependent factors underlie the risk of haemorrhagic disease of
the newborn, prevented by giving vitamin K at birth.
So pregnancy is a hypercoagulable state — raised factors,
reduced protein S and fibrinolysis — increasing thromboembolic risk and the need
for prophylaxis, while the neonate has an immature,
balanced system with low vitamin-K-dependent factors,
risking haemorrhagic disease unless vitamin K is given — both of direct anaesthetic
relevance.
Summarise the haemostatic system as a balance manipulated in clinical practice.
I would draw the topic together around haemostasis as a finely tuned balance that
clinical practice constantly assesses and deliberately manipulates.
In health, the prohaemostatic forces — vasoconstriction, platelets,
and the coagulation cascade culminating in thrombin and fibrin — are held in check
by the regulatory forces — the antithrombotic endothelium,
the natural anticoagulants antithrombin and proteins C and S,
and fibrinolysis — keeping blood fluid yet ready to seal an injury.
Disease tips this balance: towards bleeding,
in the inherited and acquired coagulopathies, or towards thrombosis,
in the thrombophilias and the hypercoagulable states such as pregnancy and surgery.
Medicine then manipulates the balance in both directions:
anticoagulant and antiplatelet drugs and thrombolytics to prevent or treat
thrombosis; and platelets, factors, fibrinogen,
antifibrinolytics and reversal agents to treat bleeding — increasingly guided by
tests from the clotting times to viscoelastic assays.
So the haemostatic system is a balance between prohaemostatic and regulatory
forces, disturbed by disease towards bleeding or thrombosis and deliberately
manipulated by drugs in both directions under laboratory and point-of-care guidance
— a balance whose management, weighing bleeding against thrombosis,
is a constant and critical task in anaesthesia.
Describe heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is a serious,
immune-mediated complication of heparin treatment, important because,
despite causing a fall in platelets,
it paradoxically predisposes to thrombosis rather than bleeding.
It arises when the patient forms antibodies against a complex of heparin with a
platelet protein, platelet factor four;
these antibodies bind and activate the platelets,
causing both their consumption — a falling platelet count,
typically some days into treatment — and a powerful activation of coagulation,
leading to arterial and venous thrombosis that can be limb- or life-threatening.
It is more common with unfractionated than with low-molecular-weight heparin.
The key to management is recognition:
a fall in the platelet count in a patient on heparin should raise the suspicion,
prompting the cessation of all heparin and, because the thrombotic risk persists,
the substitution of an alternative,
non-heparin anticoagulant — not simply stopping anticoagulation or giving platelets.
So heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is an immune reaction to
heparin-platelet-factor-four complexes that activates platelets,
causing thrombocytopenia but, paradoxically, thrombosis;
suspected from a falling platelet count on heparin,
it is managed by stopping all heparin and substituting a non-heparin anticoagulant
— a dangerous complication where the response differs from other causes of low
platelets.
Describe the role of fibrinogen and the use of cryoprecipitate.
Fibrinogen holds a special place in haemostasis as the soluble precursor of fibrin,
the structural protein of the clot,
and as the protein that bridges platelets in aggregation,
so it is essential to both arms of haemostasis.
It is the most abundant of the clotting factors, made by the liver,
and it is consumed in clot formation.
Its importance in major haemorrhage is increasingly recognised:
fibrinogen is often the first clotting factor to fall to critically low levels
during massive bleeding and dilution,
and a low fibrinogen impairs the formation of a stable clot,
so its early replacement is a priority.
Replacement is by sources rich in fibrinogen: cryoprecipitate,
the cold-precipitated fraction of plasma, which is rich in fibrinogen,
factor eight, von Willebrand factor and factor thirteen; or fibrinogen concentrate.
Viscoelastic testing can identify the low fibrinogen and guide its replacement.
So fibrinogen is the abundant precursor of fibrin and the bridge for platelet
aggregation, essential to clot formation and often the first factor to fall
critically in major haemorrhage; its early replacement,
with cryoprecipitate or fibrinogen concentrate and guided by viscoelastic testing,
is a priority in managing major bleeding.
Describe tranexamic acid and its role.
Tranexamic acid is an antifibrinolytic drug that reduces bleeding,
and its action follows directly from the physiology of fibrinolysis.
Fibrinolysis depends on plasmin, generated from plasminogen,
digesting the fibrin clot, and plasminogen must bind to fibrin,
via specific lysine-binding sites, to be activated efficiently.
Tranexamic acid is a lysine analogue that occupies these binding sites on
plasminogen, preventing it from binding fibrin and so from being activated to
plasmin; it thereby inhibits fibrinolysis and stabilises the clot,
reducing bleeding.
Its great value has been demonstrated in major trauma and in obstetric and surgical
haemorrhage, where, given early, it reduces bleeding and mortality,
and it is widely used to reduce blood loss in surgery;
it is most effective when given early, before fibrinolysis is established.
It is inexpensive and generally well tolerated.
So tranexamic acid is an antifibrinolytic that, as a lysine analogue,
blocks the binding of plasminogen to fibrin and so its conversion to plasmin,
inhibiting fibrinolysis and stabilising the clot to reduce bleeding — of proven
benefit, given early, in trauma, obstetric and surgical haemorrhage,
a cheap and important tool in managing bleeding.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Haemostasis arrests bleeding while keeping blood fluid: vasoconstriction,
then primary haemostasis (the platelet plug),
then secondary haemostasis (the coagulation cascade generating thrombin and fibrin
to consolidate the plug), then regulation and fibrinolytic removal — a balance
against both haemorrhage and thrombosis.
Second, Primary haemostasis forms the platelet plug by adhesion to exposed collagen
via von Willebrand factor, activation with granule release (ADP,
thromboxane) recruiting more platelets,
and aggregation through fibrinogen bridges (glycoprotein IIb/IIIa) — the target of
antiplatelet drugs.
Third, The coagulation cascade sequentially activates clotting factors — the
extrinsic (tissue-factor) pathway initiating in vivo (assessed by PT/INR),
the intrinsic pathway amplifying (assessed by APTT),
converging at factor X on the common pathway to generate thrombin;
thrombin converts fibrinogen to cross-linked fibrin, amplifies its own generation,
and helps regulate clotting (now understood as a Fourth,
Coagulation is regulated by the antithrombotic endothelium,
antithrombin (neutralising thrombin/activated factors, accelerated by heparin),
the protein C/S system (inactivating factors V and VIII) and tissue factor pathway
inhibitor; fibrinolysis dissolves clot via plasmin (from plasminogen by tissue
plasminogen activator acting on fibrin), producing D-dimer,
manipulated by thrombolytics and antifibrinolytics (tranexamic acid).
Fifth, Haemostasis is central to anaesthesia:
managing antiplatelet/anticoagulant drugs (heparins via antithrombin,
warfarin on vitamin-K-dependent factors,
direct oral anticoagulants) especially around regional anaesthesia
(spinal-haematoma risk), assessing and correcting coagulopathy and major
haemorrhage (products, fibrinogen, tranexamic acid, viscoelastic testing),
and thromboprophylaxis — the bleeding-versus-thrombosis balance being a constant
responsibility.
Thank you. That concludes the station.